A dinosaur hobbyist who made his name as a Microsoft multimillionaire published a scientific paper on Monday alleging “serious errors and irregularities” in dinosaur research involving some of the world’s top paleontologists.

The research, some of it dating to the 1990s, analyzed skeletons of different ages to estimate how quickly dinosaurs grew. For example, a 2001 paper, published in the journal Nature, estimates that the giant dinosaur Apatosaurus had a growth spurt of 12,000 pounds in a year.

The papers, particularly a 2004 paper in Nature on the growth of Tyrannosaurus Rex, were influential in offering an explanation for why some dinosaurs were much larger than their relatives and slashed decades off the estimated life span of the creatures.

The accuser is Nathan P. Myhrvold, a former chief technology officer at Microsoft who is well known in the worlds of avant-garde cuisine and patent law. The lead author of the papers in question is Gregory M. Erickson, a professor of anatomy and paleobiology at Florida State University.

Dr. Myhrvold ’s article, published by the journal PLoS One, says Dr. Erickson’s papers contain major mistakes, including graphs that do not match the data and curves that do not match the reported equations. And Dr. Myhrvold’s revised estimates put the maximum growth rate of Apatosaurus at about a tenth of what Dr. Erickson and his colleagues had reported.

Dr. Erickson declined to be interviewed, but issued an email statement noting that the papers had been the work of teams of scientists and had been peer-reviewed.

Dr. Myhrvold’s “reinterpretation of our data, although reaching moderately different conclusions on a species by species basis, strongly supports the cardinal conclusions that we reached regarding how dinosaurs grew,” the statement said. “The bottom line is that the empirical findings of our research group stand, and we stand behind them.”

Dr. Myhrvold, a physicist, said he was not accusing Dr. Erickson or his collaborators of deliberately falsifying or manipulating data, because he could not know how the errors occurred. But in a letter to Nature, Science, PLOS One and other journals that published Dr. Erickson’s work, he raised the possibility.

“At the very least these problems are serious errors that merit correction in the literature,” he wrote. “The problems also appear to be consistent with scientific misconduct, which may factor into any resulting investigation.”

Last week, Dr. Myhrvold emailed the scientists who had collaborated with Dr. Erickson on the papers to alert them. “I tried very hard to reproduce the results of these papers,” he told them, “and I failed to do so.” In exhaustively describing what he thought were mistakes in the papers, Dr. Myhrvold wrote, “This includes cases where the data set appears to have been altered or fabricated.”

Some of Dr. Erickson’s co-authors agree that the papers have errors that should be corrected. “I’ll be interested to see how Greg responds scientifically to Nathan’s claims,” said Kristina A. Curry Rogers, a professor of geology at Macalester College in St. Paul, who was a co-author of the 2001 paper in Nature. “If he has data to the contrary, then he can present that. If he does not, then he can explain that.”

Dr. Curry Rogers said Dr. Myhrvold had provided ample information and explanation backing up his assertions. “All his methods are laid bare,” she said. “Anyone who wants to challenge him can do it.”

Other co-authors of Dr. Erickson’s include Mark A. Norell, chairman of paleontology at the American Museum of Natural History; Philip J. Currie, a professor of dinosaur paleobiology at the University of Alberta; and Peter J. Makovicky, associate curator of paleontology at the Field Museum in Chicago.

Dr. Myhrvold said he had raised some of the issues a year ago with Dr. Makovicky, who promptly acknowledged the errors and was amenable to correcting them.

In an interview, Dr. Makovicky confirmed that “There is some kind of mismatch in our paper,” adding that another team member had done the statistical analysis. “He’s right on that point. I didn’t produce those numbers. I can’t tell you why.” He added, “I’m happy to ’fess up.”


